add: blogpost for lerobot datasets v3 release (#3073)
huggingface/blog: lerobot-datasets-v3.md

---
title: "`LeRobotDataset`: Bringing large-scale datasets to lerobot"

> thumbnail: https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/lerobotdataset-v3/lerobot-dataset-v3.png

Author: added, thank you

authors:
- user: fracapuano
- user: aractingi
- user: lhoestq
- user: CarolinePascal
- user: pepijn223
- user: jadechoghari
- user: rcadene
- user: aliberts
- user: AdilZtn
- user: imstevenpmwork
---

> **TL;DR** With `LeRobotDataset:v2` we stored one video per episode, and therefore hit filesystem limits at million-episode scale. `LeRobotDataset:v3` packs many episodes per video indexed by metadata, adds native frame streaming, lets you aggregate multiple sources into a single logical dataset, and supports direct frame/delta-frame access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**TL;DR** Today we release `LeRobotDataset:v3`! With `LeRobotDataset:v2` we stored one video per episode, and therefore hit filesystem limits at million-episode scale. `LeRobotDataset:v3` packs many episodes per video indexed by metadata, adds native frame streaming, lets you aggregate multiple sources into a single logical dataset, and supports direct frame/delta-frame access.
```

Author: added, thank you so much!

# The LeRobotDataset Format

`LeRobotDataset` is a standardized dataset format designed to address the specific needs of robot learning research. 

> In this, `LeRobotDataset` provides a unified and convenient access to robotics data across modalities, including sensorimotor readings, multiple camera feeds and teleoperation status. 

Author: added, thank you so much!

> In this, `LeRobotDataset` provides a unified and convenient access to robotics data across modalities, including sensorimotor readings, multiple camera feeds and teleoperation status. 

Author: agreed, thank you

> `LeRobotDataset` also stores general information regarding the data collected, like the task being performed by the teleoperator, the kind of robot used and measurement details like the frames per second at which the recording of both image and robot state's streams are proceeding.

Author: fixed, thank you

*   **`data/`**: Contains the core frame-by-frame tabular data in Parquet files. To improve performance and handle large datasets, data from **multiple episodes are concatenated into larger files**. These files are organized into chunked subdirectories to keep file sizes manageable. Therefore, a single file typically contains data for more than one episode.
*   **`videos/`**: Contains the MP4 video files for all visual observation streams. Similar to the `data/` directory, video footage from **multiple episodes is concatenated into single MP4 files**. This strategy significantly reduces the number of files in the dataset, which is more efficient for modern filesystems. The path structure (`/videos/<camera_key>/<chunk>/file_...mp4`) allows the data loader to locate the correct video file and then seek to the precise timestamp for a given frame.

## Code Example: Using `LeRobotDataset` with `torch.utils.data.DataLoader`

> This section provides an overview of how to access datasets hosted on Hugging Face using the `LeRobotDataset` class. 

Author: feedback taken, thank you!

Every dataset on the Hugging Face Hub containing the three main pillars presented above (Tabular and Visual Data, as well as relational Metadata) can be assessed with a single line.
Most reinforcement learning (RL) and behavioral cloning (BC) algorithms tend to operate on stack of observation and actions.
For instance, RL algorithms typically use a history of previous observations `o_{t-H_o:t}` to mitigate partial observability.

> BC cloning algorithms are instead typically trained to regress chunks of multiple actions rather than single controls.

Reviewer 2: BC?

Author: Behavioral Cloning, added as an acronym in the previous sentence. Tho I had an extra cloning which I now removed so ty so much nonetheless 🤗

To accommodate for the specifics of robot learning training, `LeRobotDataset` provides a native windowing operation, whereby we can use the *seconds* before and after any given observation using `delta_timestamps`. 
Non available frames is opportuninely padded, with a padding mask released to provide support in this.
Notably, this all happens within the `LeRobotDataset` and is entitrely transparent to higher level wrappers such as `torch.utils.data.DataLoader`.

Conveniently, by using `LeRobotDataset` with a Pytorch `DataLoader` one can automatically collate the individual sample dictionaries from the dataset into a single dictionary of batched tensors.

> 

Author: added a small snippet on how to install lerobot and record a dataset, thank you both!

)

# Accessing an index now returns a stack of frames for the specified key
sample = dataset[100]

# The image tensor will now have a time dimension
# 'observation.images.wrist_camera' has shape [T, C, H, W], where T=3
print(sample['observation.images.wrist_camera'].shape)

batch_size=16
# wrap the dataset in a DataLoader to use process it batches for training purposes
data_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
    dataset,
    batch_size=batch_size
)

# 3. Iterate over the DataLoader in a training loop
num_epochs = 1
device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"

for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    for batch in data_loader:
        # 'batch' is a dictionary where each value is a batch of tensors.
        # For example, batch['action'] will have a shape of [32, action_dim].

        # If using delta_timestamps, a batched image tensor might have a
        # shape of [32, T, C, H, W].

        # Move data to the appropriate device (e.g., GPU)
        observations = batch['observation.state'].to(device)
        actions = batch['action'].to(device)
        images = batch['observation.images.wrist_camera'].to(device)

        # Next do amazing_model.forward(batch)
        ...

> ```

Reviewer 2: and explain what the migration script does too

> ```

Author: added, thank you both

> ```

Author: added the dataset viewer, thank you

> ```

Author: Added a wrapping up and section on how to migrate a dataset

BC algorithms are instead typically trained to regress chunks of multiple actions rather than single controls.
To accommodate for the specifics of robot learning training, `LeRobotDataset` provides a native windowing operation, whereby we can use the *seconds* before and after any given observation using `delta_timestamps`. 
Unavailable frames are padded, and the padding mask is provided to remove these from training.
Notably, this all happens within the `LeRobotDataset` and is entirely transparent to higher-level wrappers such as `torch.utils.data.DataLoader`.

Conveniently, by using `LeRobotDataset` with a PyTorch `DataLoader` one can automatically collate the individual sample dictionaries from the dataset into a single dictionary of batched tensors.

```python
from lerobot.datasets import LeRobotDataset

repo_id = "yaak-ai/L2D-v3"

# Load from the Hugging Face Hub (will be cached locally)
dataset = LeRobotDataset(repo_id)

# Get the 100th frame in the dataset by index
sample = dataset[100]
print(sample)
# The sample is a dictionary of tensors
# {
#     'observation.state': tensor([...]),
#     'action': tensor([...]),
#     'observation.images.wrist_camera': tensor([C, H, W]),

> #     'timestamp': tensor(1.234),

Reviewer 3: ```
'observation.images.map': tensor([[[0.8784, 0.8784, 0.8784,  ..., 0.9882, 0.9686, 0.9686],
         [0.8784, 0.8784, 0.8784,  ..., 0.9882, 0.9686, 0.9686],
         [0.8784, 0.8784, 0.8784,  ..., 0.9451, 0.9686, 0.9686],
         ...,
         [0.9608, 0.9569, 0.9608,  ..., 0.9804, 0.9804, 0.9804],
         [0.9608, 0.9608, 0.9569,  ..., 0.9804, 0.9804, 0.9804],
         [0.9608, 0.9569, 0.9608,  ..., 0.9804, 0.9804, 0.9804]],

        [[0.8706, 0.8706, 0.8706,  ..., 0.8196, 0.8196, 0.8196],
         [0.8706, 0.8706, 0.8706,  ..., 0.8196, 0.8196, 0.8196],
         [0.8706, 0.8706, 0.8706,  ..., 0.8275, 0.8157, 0.8157],
         ...,
         [0.9608, 0.9569, 0.9608,  ..., 0.9725, 0.9725, 0.9725],
         [0.9608, 0.9608, 0.9569,  ..., 0.9725, 0.9725, 0.9725],
         [0.9608, 0.9569, 0.9608,  ..., 0.9725, 0.9725, 0.9725]],

        [[0.8745, 0.8745, 0.8745,  ..., 0.6000, 0.6392, 0.6392],
         [0.8745, 0.8745, 0.8745,  ..., 0.6000, 0.6392, 0.6392],
         [0.8745, 0.8745, 0.8745,  ..., 0.6627, 0.6471, 0.6471],
         ...,
         [0.9608, 0.9569, 0.9608,  ..., 0.9765, 0.9765, 0.9765],
         [0.9608, 0.9608, 0.9569,  ..., 0.9765, 0.9765, 0.9765],
         [0.9608, 0.9569, 0.9608,  ..., 0.9765, 0.9765, 0.9765]]]), 'observation.state.vehicle': tensor([2.4398e+01, 3.0111e+02, 9.3393e-01, 4.8582e+01, 1.3396e+01, 4.8582e+01,
        2.6000e-01, 9.0000e-01]), 'observation.state.lanes': '1', 'observation.state.road': 'residential', 'observation.state.surface': 'asphalt', 'observation.state.max_speed': '30.0', 'observation.state.precipitation': '0.000', 'observation.state.conditions': 'Clouds', 'observation.state.lighting': 'Day', 'observation.state.waypoints': tensor([[13.3957, 48.5823],
        [13.3956, 48.5824],
        [13.3955, 48.5824],
        [13.3953, 48.5825],
        [13.3952, 48.5825],
        [13.3951, 48.5825],
        [13.3950, 48.5826],
        [13.3949, 48.5826],
        [13.3947, 48.5827],
        [13.3946, 48.5827]]), 'observation.state.timestamp': tensor(1681114605737199257), 'task.policy': 'EXPERT', 'task.instructions': 'Follow the waypoints while adhering to traffic rules and regulations', 'action.continuous': tensor([ 0.1693,  0.0000, -0.0092]), 'action.discrete': tensor([3, 0]), 'timestamp': tensor(10.), 'frame_index': tensor(100), 'episode_index': tensor(0), 'index': tensor(100), 'task_index': tensor(0), 'task': 0}
```

Author: ```suggestion
# The sample is a dictionary of tensors
# {
#     'observation.state': tensor([...]),
#     'action': tensor([...]),
#     'observation.images. front_left': tensor([C, H, W]),
#     'timestamp': tensor(1.234),
```

#     ...
# }
delta_timestamps = {

>     "observation.images.wrist_camera": [-0.2, -0.1, 0.0]  # 0.2 and 0.1 seconds *before* any observation

Reviewer 3: L2D has the following as images field "observation.images.front_left"

}
dataset = LeRobotDataset(
    repo_id
    delta_timestamps=delta_timestamps
)

# Accessing an index now returns a stack of frames for the specified key
sample = dataset[100]

# The image tensor will now have a time dimension
# 'observation.images.wrist_camera' has shape [T, C, H, W], where T=3

> print(sample['observation.images.wrist_camera'].shape)

Reviewer 3: same as above :)

Author: ```suggestion
print(sample['observation.images. front_left'].shape)
```

batch_size=16
# Wrap the dataset in a DataLoader to process it in batches for training purposes
data_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
    dataset,
    batch_size=batch_size
)

# 3. Iterate over the DataLoader in a training loop
num_epochs = 1
device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"

for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    for batch in data_loader:
        # 'batch' is a dictionary where each value is a batch of tensors.
        # For example, batch['action'] will have a shape of [32, action_dim].

        # If using delta_timestamps, a batched image tensor might have a
        # shape of [32, T, C, H, W].

        # Move data to the appropriate device (e.g., GPU)

>         observations = batch['observation.state'].to(device)

Reviewer 3: `observation.state.vehicle`

        actions = batch['action'].to(device)

>         images = batch['observation.images.wrist_camera'].to(device)

Author: ```suggestion
        images = batch['observation.images. front_left'].to(device)
```

## Table of Contents

- [Install `lerobot`, and record a dataset](#install-lerobot-and-record-a-dataset)
- [The (New) Format Design](#the-new-format-design)
- [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
- [Convert your dataset to v3.0](#convert-your-dataset-to-v30)
- [Code Example: Using `LeRobotDataset` with `torch.utils.data.DataLoader`](#code-example-using-lerobotdataset-with-torchutilsdatadataloader)
- [Wrapping up](#wrapping-up)

# LeRobotDataset, v3.0

`LeRobotDataset` is a standardized dataset format designed to address the specific needs of robot learning, and it provides unified and convenient access to robotics data across modalities, including sensorimotor readings, multiple camera feeds and teleoperation status.
Our dataset format also stores general information regarding the way the data is being collected (*metadata*), including a textual description of the task being performed, the kind of robot used and measurement details like the frames per second at which both image and robot state streams are sampled.

> Metadata are very useful to index and search across robotics datasets on the Hugging Face Hub!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata are useful to index and search across robotics datasets on the Hugging Face Hub!
```

Within `lerobot`, the robotics library we are developing at Hugging Face, `LeRobotDataset` provides a unified interface for working with multi-modal, time-series data, and it seamlessly integrates both with the Hugging Face and Pytorch ecosystems.
The dataset format is designed to be easily extensible and customizable, and already supports openly available datasets from a wide range of embodiments—including manipulator platforms such as the SO-100 arms and ALOHA-2 setup, real-world humanoid data, simulation datasets, and even self-driving car data!
You can explore the current datasets contributed by the community using the [dataset visualizer](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lerobot/visualize_dataset)! 🔗

Besides scale, this new release of `LeRobotDataset` also enables support for a *streaming* functionality, allowing to process batches of data from large datasets on the fly, without having to download prohibitively large collections of data onto disk.
You can access and use any dataset in `v3.0` in streaming mode by using the dedicated `StreamingLeRobotDataset` interface!

> Streaming datasets is a key milestones towards more accessible robot learning, and we are very excited about sharing this with the community 🤗

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Streaming datasets is a key milestones towards more accessible robot learning, and we are excited about sharing it with the community 🤗
```

<div style="display:flex; justify-content:center; gap:12px; flex-wrap:wrap;">
  <figure style="margin:0; text-align:center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/lerobotdataset-v3/asset1datasetv3.png" alt="LeRobotDataset v3 diagram" width="200" />
    <figcaption style="font-size:0.9em; color:#666;">From episode-based to file-based datasets</figcaption>
  </figure>
  <figure style="margin:0; text-align:center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/lerobotdataset-v3/streaming-lerobot.png" alt="StreamingLeRobotDataset" width="500" />
    <figcaption style="font-size:0.9em; color:#666;">We directly enable dataset streaming from the Hugging Face Hub for on-the-fly processing.</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

## Install `lerobot`, and record a dataset

> [`lerobot`](https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot) is the end-to-end robotics library developed at Hugging Face, supporting real-world robotics as well as state of the art robot learning algorithms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

[`lerobot`](https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot) is the end-to-end robotics library developed at Hugging Face, supporting real-world robotics as well as state of the art robot learning algorithms.
```

3.  **Metadata**: A collection of JSON files which describes the dataset's structure in terms of its metadata, serving as the relational counterpart to both the tabular and visual dimensions of data. Metadata includes the different feature schemas, frame rates, normalization statistics, and episode boundaries.

![](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/lerobotdataset-v3/dataset-v3-pillars.png)

To support datasets with potentially millions of episodes (resulting in hundreds of millions/billions of individual frames), we merge data from different episodes into the same high-level structure.
Concretely, this means that any given tabular collection and video will not contain information about one episode only, but a concatenation of the information available in multiple episodes.
This keeps the pressure on the file system manageable, both locally and on remote storage providers like Hugging Face.
We can then leverage metadata to gather episode-specific information, e.g. the timestamp a given episode starts or ends in a certain video.

> Concretely, datasets are organized as repositories containing:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasets are organized as repositories containing:
```

* **`meta/episodes/`**: This directory contains metadata about each individual episode, such as its length, corresponding task, and pointers to where its data is stored. For scalability, this information is stored in chunked Parquet files rather than a single large JSON file.
* **`data/`**: Contains the core frame-by-frame tabular data in Parquet files. To improve performance and handle large datasets, data from **multiple episodes are concatenated into larger files**. These files are organized into chunked subdirectories to keep file sizes manageable. Therefore, a single file typically contains data for more than one episode.
* **`videos/`**: Contains the MP4 video files for all visual observation streams. Similar to the `data/` directory, video footage from **multiple episodes is concatenated into single MP4 files**. This strategy significantly reduces the number of files in the dataset, which is more efficient for modern file systems. The path structure (`/videos/<camera_key>/<chunk>/file_...mp4`) allows the data loader to locate the correct video file and then seek to the precise timestamp for a given frame.

## Migrate your `v2.1` dataset to `v3.0`

> `LeRobotDataset:v3.0` will be released with `lerobot-v0.4.0`, together with the possibility to easily convert any dataset currently hosted on the Hugging Face Hub to the new `v3.0` using:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

`LeRobotDataset:v3.0` will be released with `lerobot-v0.4.0`, together with the possibility to easily convert any dataset currently hosted on the Hugging Face Hub to the new `v3.0` using:
```

sample = dataset[100]

# The image tensor will now have a time dimension
# 'observation.images.wrist_camera' has shape [T, C, H, W], where T=3
print(sample['observation.images.front_left'].shape)

batch_size=16
# Wrap the dataset in a DataLoader to process it in batches for training purposes
data_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
    dataset,
    batch_size=batch_size
)

# 3. Iterate over the DataLoader in a training loop
num_epochs = 1
device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"

for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    for batch in data_loader:
        # 'batch' is a dictionary where each value is a batch of tensors.
        # For example, batch['action'] will have a shape of [32, action_dim].

        # If using delta_timestamps, a batched image tensor might have a
        # shape of [32, T, C, H, W].

        # Move data to the appropriate device (e.g., GPU)
        observations = batch['observation.state.vehicle'].to(device)
        actions = batch['action.continuous'].to(device)
        images = batch['observation.images.front_left'].to(device)

        # Next do amazing_model.forward(batch)
        ...
```

> ## Streaming compatibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Streaming
```

> You can also use any dataset in `v3.0` format in streaming mode, without the need to downloading it locally, by using the `StreamingLeRobotDataset` class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

You can also use any dataset in `v3.0` format in streaming mode, without the need to downloading it locally, by using the `StreamingLeRobotDataset` class.
```
